[Summarization] Add summarization and summary formats document to docs for publishing to fluidframework.com (#21873)
microsoft/FluidFramework: docs/content/docs/concepts/summarization.md

Reviewer: It took me a second to realize that this is a symlink - I think? unfortunately I'm not confident that they'll work as expected across platforms. We do have other ways to include contents from outside the docs folder, though. Look at the sequences doc, which pulls in the README from the sequence package:

https://github.com/microsoft/FluidFramework/blob/b70b836ee25ddc735535296d68a9f75a9d7c02b0/docs/content/docs/data-structures/sequences.md?plain=1#L8-L12

Usage should be straightforward. The approach _is_ brittle; if the README changes, the include also has to be updated unless you include it all. @Josmithr are there better options today?

I'm assuming you would only want to include part of the file, so you could create a new third md file, maybe container-runtime/docs/container-runtime.md (?) and then include _that_ file in both the README and the docs file. Might not be worth the hassle though.

Reviewer: And if you _can_ include the whole file, then it's very simple. but usually, you need to exclude at least the title line or something. You can provide a start without an end on the range though.

Author: Thank you for the suggestion. I updated it as per your suggestion. Can you please take a look.

---
title: Summarization

> menuPosition: 10

Author: @tylerbutler Is this menuPosition needed? Also, I removed alias which was in the summarizer.md doc because there were no summarizer docs under those folders.

---

<!-- IMPORTANT: Don't manually edit the auto-generated content below. Instead, edit the source file (look at the path
     argument) and then run "npm run build:md-magic" from the docs folder. That will update all autogenerated
     content, so you should commit the resulting changes. -->

<!-- AUTO-GENERATED-CONTENT:START (INCLUDE:path=../../../../packages/runtime/container-runtime/src/summary/README.md) -->

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
<!-- NOTE: This section is automatically generated by embedding the referenced file contents. Do not update these generated contents directly. -->

## Table of contents

-   [Introduction](#introduction)
    -   [Summary vs snapshot](#summary-vs-snapshot)
-   [Why do we need summaries?](#why-do-we-need-summaries)
-   [Who generates summaries?](#who-generates-summaries)
-   [When are summaries generated?](#when-are-summaries-generated)
-   [How are summaries generated?](#how-are-summaries-generated)
    -   [Summary Lifecycle](#summary-lifecycle)
    -   [Single-commit vs two-commit summaries](#single-commit-vs-two-commit-summaries)
    -   [Incremental summaries](#incremental-summaries)
    -   [Resiliency](#resiliency)

> -   [What does a summary look like?](#what-does-a-summary-look-like)

Reviewer: I don't think you want the TOC - the docs pages already have nav and everything, so this will be redundant. You can add a start argument to the include to omit the top of the readme.

## Introduction

This document provides a conceptual overview of summarization without going into a lot of technical or implementation details. It describes what summaries are, how / when they are generated and what do they look like. The goal is for this to be an entry point into summarization for users and developers alike.

### Summary vs snapshot

The terms summary and snapshot are sometimes used interchangeably. Both represent the state of a container at a point in time. They differ in some respects which are described in [this FAQ](https://fluidframework.com/docs/faq/#summarization).

> ## Why do we need summaries?

Reviewer 2: The most important advice I can give you is to provide more of the "why" and the goals/purposes of summaries. Then the point of the detailed parts can be explained by saying how they contribute to one of the goals. For example, what goal of summaries is advanced by the whole ack/nack business? What goal is advanced by the broadcast of the summary?

Author: That's a good point. However, the thing is that the summary broadcast ops and acks have no purpose other than to contribute to the competion of the summary process. This lets summarizer clients keep track of the latest summary.

So, really, the only goal of summaries is to have the state of the container at a point in time for future clients to start at.

> A 'summary' captures the state of a container at a point in time. Without it, a client would have to apply every operation in the op log, even if those operations no longer affected the current state (e.g. op 1 inserts 'h' and op 2 deletes 'h'). For very large op logs, this would be very expensive for clients to both process and download from the service.

Author: I changed the first usage of operations in this doc to say operations (hereafter ops)

Instead, when a client opens a collaborative document, it can download a snapshot of the container, and simply process new operations from that point forward.

## Who generates summaries?

> Summaries can be generated by any client connected in "write" mode. In the current implementation, summaries are generated by a separate non-interactive client. Using a separate client is an optimization - this client doesn't have to take local changes into account which can make the summary process more complicated. A summarizer client has the following characteristics:

Author: The reason for mentioning "In the current implmentation" is that the protocol allows any client to generate summaries. It's just that the current implementation is using a separate client.
However, similar to a point you made elsewhere, it's better to just make the document about what currently happens and when it changes, update the document.

-   All the clients connected to the document participate in a process called "summary client election" to elect a "parent summarizer" client. Typically, it's the oldest "write" client connected to the document. The parent summarizer client spawns a "summarizer" client which is responsible for summarization.
-   A summarizer client is like any other client connected to the document except that users cannot interact with this client, and it only works on the state it receives from other clients. It has a brand-new container with its own connection to services.

> > Note that if the summarizer client closes, the "summary client election" process will choose a new one, if applicable. The default "summary client election" algorithm is to select the oldest "write" client as the parent summarizer client which in turn will create the summarizer client.

Reviewer: Don't use blockquotes for this sort of thing.

```suggestion
Note: if the summarizer client closes, the "summary client election" process will choose a new one, if applicable.
```

## When are summaries generated?

> The summarizer client periodically generates summary based on heuristics calculated based on configurations such as the number of user or system ops received, the amount of time a client has been idle (hasn't received any ops), the maximum time since last summary, maximum number of ops since last summary, etc. The heuristic configurations are defined by an _ISummaryConfigurationHeuristics_ interface defined in [this file](../../src/containerRuntime.ts).

Reviewer: You can't use relative links. They either need to be absolute or you need to use "reference links" and define them differently for the in-repo file and the docs. For example:

```md
...is defined in [this file][my-name]

[my-name]: ../../src/containerRuntime.ts
```

Then in the docs file you include the middle of the source file, but omit the links, and add correct links at the bottom of the docs file. But if you can use absolute links that's easier.

Author: Changed them to absolute path. I am assuming you meant absolute path from the root of the repo right. I used something like "/packages/runtime/container-runtime/src/containerRuntime.ts".

Reviewer 3: That won't be valid on the website, which is rooted under `docs`. Tyler's suggestion to use "reference links" is probably the best option here. I.e., use `[this file][my-name]` syntax in the section you're reusing, then define the following at the bottom of each respective markdown doc:

in-repo-doc
```md
[my-name]: ../../src/containerRuntime.ts
```

website doc
```md
[my-name]: <github URL for code file on main>
```

Author: Sounds good. Updated as per your suggestion.

> The summarizer client uses a default set of configurations defined by _DefaultSummaryConfiguration_ in [this file](../../src/containerRuntime.ts). These can be overridden by providing a new set of configurations as part of container runtime options during creation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The summarizer client uses a default set of configurations defined by `DefaultSummaryConfiguration` in [this file](../../src/containerRuntime.ts). These can be overridden by providing a new set of configurations as part of container runtime options during creation.
```

If these are names from code, use code formatting.

## How are summaries generated?

When summarization process is triggered, every object in the container's object tree that has data to be summarized is asked to generate its summary, starting at the container runtime which is at the root. There are various objects that participate in the summary process and generate its summary such as data stores, DDSes, garbage collector, blob manager, id compressor, etc. Note that the user data is in the DDSes.

### Summary Lifecycle

The lifecycle of a summary starts when a "parent summarizer" client is elected.

-   The parent summarizer spawns a non-interactive summarizer client.
-   The summarizer client periodically starts a summary as per heuristics. A summary happens at a particular sequence number called the "summary sequence number" or reference sequence number for the summary.

> -   The container runtime (or simply runtime) generates a summary tree (described in the ["What does a summary look like?"](#what-does-a-summary-look-like) section below).

Author: Changed it as per your suggestion. Yeah, basically container runtime == runtime in the context of this doc.

-   The runtime uploads the summary tree to the Fluid storage service which returns a handle (unique id) to the summary if the upload is successful. Otherwise, it returns a failure.
-   The runtime submits a "summarize" op to the Fluid ordering service containing the uploaded summary handle and the summary sequence number.

> -   The ordering service stamps it with a sequence number (like any other op) and broadcasts the summarize op.

Author: The summarize op isn't really for other clients. It's part of a 2-commit summary process:
- Summarizer uploads a summary and the server returns a handle (basically a unique id) but the summary isn't final yet meaning that the server hasn't committed it yet.
- The client sends a summary op with the uploaded handle so that the server can identify which summary this op is for. It then augments the uploaded summary with some info, generates a new handle and sends this handle in a summary ack.
- Once the summarizer clients receives the summary ack, it knows that the summary is now accepted and committed by the server.

> -   The ordering service stamps it with a sequence number (like any other op) and broadcasts the summarize op.

Author: Should I mention this or part of it to make the purpose of summary op clear?

> -   The ordering service stamps it with a sequence number (like any other op) and broadcasts the summarize op.

Author: Updated the section to include the purpose of the summary broadcast and ack / nack.

> -   Another service on the server responds to the summarize op.

Author: I should probably name this other service similar to Fluid storage service and Fluid ordering service.

The summarizer client needs to know what was the last summary that was accepted by the service. It needs this information for 2 things:
1. Incremental summaries - When generating a summary, the objects in the system essentiall diff their content against the last summary and only summarize again if their content changed.
2. When uploading a summary, the client has to specify the handle of the last summary. If it's incorrect, the service will reject the summary upload. This is also because of incremental summaries because if it's not correct, the summary would be incorrect.

> -   Another service on the server responds to the summarize op.

Reviewer 2: > I explained the point of the broadcast above. It is also used by future summarizer clients for validation purposes, i.e., to ensure that all summary ops have a corresponding summary ack. But this is not really needed.

Sorry, but I don't find an explanation of the point of the broadcast anywhere. Broadcast sends something to multiple clients. Why is anything being sent to non-summarizer clients? Why can't the service and the summarizer client just communicate without involving other clients?

> -   Another service on the server responds to the summarize op.

Author: I updated the section to explain it. It's for the current and future summarizer clients and has to be in the op log for future summarizer clients. The service and client could communicate without involving other clients and that's what single-commit summaries will do once we fully enable them.

> -   Another service on the server responds to the summarize op.

Author: Updated the section to make it clearer.

    -   If the summary is accepted, it sends a "summary ack" with the summary sequence number and a summary handle. This handle may or may not be the same as the one in summary op depending on whether this is a single-commit or two-commit summary. More details on this below.
    -   If the summary is rejected, it sends a "summary nack" with the details of the summary op

> -   The runtime completes the summary process on receiving the summary ack / nack. The runtime has a timeout called "maxAckWaitTime" and if the summary op, ack or nack is not received within this time, it will fail this summary.

Author: Other clients do not care. Only summarizer client cares about it. If it's summary is nacked, it will close, a new summarizer will be chosen and the summary process will start again.

Should I mention this?

> -   The runtime completes the summary process on receiving the summary ack / nack. The runtime has a timeout called "maxAckWaitTime" and if the summary op, ack or nack is not received within this time, it will fail this summary.

Author: done.

### Single-commit vs two-commit summaries

By default, Fluid uses "two-commit summaries" mode where the two commits refer to the storage committing the summary twice and returning two different handles for it - One when the summary is uploaded and second, on responding to the summary op via a summary ack. In this mode, when the server receives the summary op, it augments the corresponding summary with a "protocol" blob hence generating a new commit and new handle for this summary which it returns in the summary ack.

> Fluid is switching to "single-commit summary" mode where the client adds the "protocol" blob when uploading the summary. Thus, the server doesn't need to augment the summary and the summary ack is no longer required. As soon as the summary is uploaded (first commit), the summary process is complete. The "summarize" op then is just a way to indicate that a summary happened, and it has details of the summary

Author: That's a good point. The problem is that we are in the middle of switching to single commit summaries. One of the services supports it and it's enabled for them but for others we are still using two-commnit summaries.

Maybe I can say that there are 2 summary modes and it can be configured which mode to use. We are actively working on switching to single-commit summaries by FF 3.0?

> Fluid is switching to "single-commit summary" mode where the client adds the "protocol" blob when uploading the summary. Thus, the server doesn't need to augment the summary and the summary ack is no longer required. As soon as the summary is uploaded (first commit), the summary process is complete. The "summarize" op then is just a way to indicate that a summary happened, and it has details of the summary

Reviewer 2: > That's a good point. The problem is that we are in the middle of switching to single commit summaries. One of the services supports it and it's enabled for them but for others we are still using two-commnit summaries.
> 
> Maybe I can say that there are 2 summary modes and it can be configured which mode to use. We are actively working on switching to single-commit summaries by FF 3.0?

Do Fluid app devs need to know the implementation details of summaries? How does this help them create Fluid apps?

> Fluid is switching to "single-commit summary" mode where the client adds the "protocol" blob when uploading the summary. Thus, the server doesn't need to augment the summary and the summary ack is no longer required. As soon as the summary is uploaded (first commit), the summary process is complete. The "summarize" op then is just a way to indicate that a summary happened, and it has details of the summary

Author: Not really. But this document is a bit more of a deep dive into the concept of summarization. However, I removed this section. This document will be updated once we completely move to single-commit summaries.

> ---
> title: Summarization
> menuPosition: 10
> ---

Reviewer: Since you've changed the URL, you need to add an alias or the old URL will be broken. You can also just not rename the file and use the existing URL. There doesn't seem to be any reason to change it. You should also keep the existing aliases for the same reason.

```suggestion
---
title: Summarization
menuPosition: 10
aliases:
  - "/docs/advanced/summarizer/"
  - "/docs/deep/summarizer/"
  - "/docs/concepts/summarizer/"
---
```

Author: I didn't realize we need to keep aliases to old locations. Is it because if someone has a link to the old doc, it won't work?

Author: I changed the name back and added aliases.

Reviewer: > I didn't realize we need to keep aliases to old locations. Is it because if someone has a link to the old doc, it won't work?

Yes. As Tim Berners-Lee himself said, "Cool URIs don't change": https://www.w3.org/Provider/Style/URI

Author: Neat

## Who generates summaries?

Summaries can be generated by any client connected in "write" mode. They are generated by a separate non-interactive client called the summarizer client. Using a separate client is an optimization - this client doesn't have to take local changes into account which can make the summary process more complicated.
A summarizer client is like any other client connected to the document except that users cannot interact with this client, and it only works on the state it receives from other clients. It has a brand-new container with its own connection to services.
All the clients connected to the document participate in a process called "summary client election" to elect a "parent summarizer" client. Typically, it's the oldest "write" client connected to the document. The parent summarizer client spawns a "summarizer" client which is responsible for summarization.

Note: If the summarizer client closes, the "summary client election" process will choose a new one, if there are eligible clients.

## When are summaries generated?

> The summarizer client periodically generates summary based on heuristics calculated based on configurations such as the number of user or system operations received, the amount of time a client has been idle (hasn't received any ops), the maximum time since last summary, maximum number of ops since last summary, etc. The heuristic configurations are defined by an `ISummaryConfigurationHeuristics` interface defined in [this file][container-runtime].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The summarizer client periodically generates summary based on heuristics calculated based on configurations such as the number of user or system operations received, the amount of time a client has been idle (hasn't received any ops), the maximum time since last summary, maximum number of ops since last summary, etc. The heuristic configurations are defined by an `ISummaryConfigurationHeuristics` interface defined in [containerRuntime.ts in the container-runtime package][container-runtime].
```

> The summarizer client uses a default set of configurations defined by `DefaultSummaryConfiguration` in [this file][container-runtime]. These can be overridden by providing a new set of configurations as part of container runtime options during creation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The summarizer client uses a default set of configurations defined by `DefaultSummaryConfiguration` in [containerRuntime.ts in the container-runtime package][container-runtime]. These can be overridden by providing a new set of configurations as part of container runtime options during creation.
```

-   The ordering service then responds to the summarize op:
    -   If the summary is accepted, it sends a "summary ack" with the summary sequence number and a summary handle.
    -   If the summary is rejected, it sends a "summary nack" with the details of the summary op.
-   The runtime processes the summary ack or nack completes the summary process as success or failure accordingly.
    -   If the summary is successful, the handle in the ack becomes the last successful summary's handle which is used when upload summaries as described earlier.
    -   If the summary failed, the summarizer client closes and the summary election process starts to elect a new one.
-   The runtime has a timeout called "maxAckWaitTime" and if the summary op, ack or nack is not received within this time, it will fail this summary.

### Incremental summaries

> Summaries are incremental, i.e., if an object (or node) did not change since the last summary, it doesn't have to re-summarize its entire contents. Fluid supports the concept of a summary handle defined in [this file][summary-protocol]. A handle is a path to a subtree in a snapshot and it allows objects to reference a subtree in the previous snapshot, which is essentially an instruction to storage to find that subtree and populate into new summary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Summaries are incremental, i.e., if an object (or node) did not change since the last summary, it doesn't have to re-summarize its entire contents. Fluid supports the concept of a summary handle defined in [summary.ts in the protocol-definitions package][summary-protocol]. A handle is a path to a subtree in a snapshot and it allows objects to reference a subtree in the previous snapshot, which is essentially an instruction to storage to find that subtree and populate into new summary.
```

## What does a summary look like?

<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

<!-- AUTO-GENERATED-CONTENT:END -->

<!-- IMPORTANT: Don't manually edit the auto-generated content below. Instead, edit the source file (look at the path
     argument) and then run "npm run build:md-magic" from the docs folder. That will update all autogenerated
     content, so you should commit the resulting changes. -->

<!-- AUTO-GENERATED-CONTENT:START (INCLUDE:path=../../../../packages/runtime/container-runtime/src/summary/summaryFormats.md&start=16&end=222) -->

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
<!-- NOTE: This section is automatically generated by embedding the referenced file contents. Do not update these generated contents directly. -->

The following sections describe the fundamental structure of a summary / snapshot tree as produced by the runtime, explains the various node types within the tree along with their respective data, and shows the distinctions between a summary tree and a snapshot tree.

### Summary Format

> Summary is uploaded to storage and is the container's state at a point in time. A summary is represented by an `ISummaryTree` which is defined in [this file][summary-protocol] and has the following basic structure (some optional properties are removed for simplicity):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Summary is uploaded to storage and is the container's state at a point in time. A summary is represented by an `ISummaryTree` which is defined in [summary.ts in the protocol-definitions package][summary-protocol] and has the following basic structure (some optional properties are removed for simplicity):
```

        ```typescript
        export interface ISummaryAttachment {
        	type: SummaryType.Attachment;
        	id: string;
        }
        ```

    -   `ISummaryHandle` - A summary handle is used for incremental summaries. If a node hasn't changed since the last successful summary, instead of sending it's entire contents, it can send a "handle" which is a path to its summary tree object in the last summary. For example, if a data store or DDS did not change since the last summary, the runtime will use a handle for the entire data store instead of re-sending the entire subtree. The same concept applies for a summary blob or a summary attachment and the "handleType" should be set according to the type of the node. An example of "handle" that a DDS sends would be something like: "/_dataStoreId_/_ddsId_".

        ```typescript
        export interface ISummaryHandle {
            type: SummaryType.Handle;
            handleType: SummaryTypeNoHandle;
            handle: string;
        }
        export type SummaryTypeNoHandle =
            | SummaryType.Tree
            | SummaryType.Blob
            | SummaryType.Attachment;
        ```

### Snapshot Format

> Snapshot is downloaded from the storage (typically on document load) and is the container's state at a point in time. A snapshot is represented by an `ISnapshotTree` which is defined in [this file][storage-protocol] and has the following basic structure (some optional properties are removed for simplicity):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Snapshot is downloaded from the storage (typically on document load) and is the container's state at a point in time. A snapshot is represented by an `ISnapshotTree` which is defined in [storage.ts in the protocol-definitions package][storage-protocol] and has the following basic structure (some optional properties are removed for simplicity):
```
